---
title: "Introducing An Academic"
date: 2026-04-15
---

As a first post I thought I'd try to write something of an introduction.  My plan with this blog is to post informal, causual updates about what I do as an academic. I feel like what it means to be an academic is extremely varied.  I really love my job.  I can also see that in many ways I am lucky and privaledged.  I've been working in higher education for something like 15 years, it has been quite a journey.

It seems to me that a lot can come from simply being in the right place at the right time. This can happen unknowingly, and we can also try our best to get ourselves into fortuitous circumstances. I feel like a major constraint in life can simply be, through no fault of our own, not knowing what is possible (a "perceptual horizon").  So hopefully, by posting the more informal parts of my working life, it might help others to build up a picture of what is possible. One of the greatest blessings in life is to have choice, and this is facilitated by an awareness of possibilities.

## What is it like being an academic?

This is a very difficult question to answer concisely.  The best starting place, in my experience, is that there is not a single clear line management structure or hierarchy, and that everyone has multiple roles and responsibilities.  This has a huge impact on what it feels like to work in academia.  It can feel bewildering, chaotic, but also vibrant and meaningful.

To give an example, I am currently a Senior Lecturer (a "middle" career position), but I also hold the role of School Education Director (I like to think, top of the school, bottom of the faculty).  This means that within a single day, I will be talking both up and down the hierarchy, depending on the context of the work I am doing.  It means that it cannot be taken for granted that someone is "my boss". Sometimes my students are older than me or arrive with more experience. I find it is an environment that often defies categorisation, or else it can make a fool of you.

In a similar way, what it means to be an academic varies depending on subject matter, on research ineterests, contract types, and so on.  Working at the University of Bristol, I am on a "pathway 3" contract - this places an emphasis on teaching and scholarship of learning.  On paper, I am expected to invest 2 days a week to teaching, 2 days a week to administration, and 1 day a week to research.  In reality, every week is different, and sometimes research is teaching, or teaching informs research, etc.  I find that being an academic has a lot to do with figuring out which work to do, in which context, when and how.

I think I had typical experiences of early career academia.  I had short, fixed-term contracts, where I struggled with a feeling of needing to demonstrate my value to secure my next contract.  I felt like I couldn't say no to work.  To me, it made the whole academic system feel exploitative. I worked tenaciously under a feeling of immense pressure.  At the end of my first post-doc position I was given the feedback "you did amazing work, but the wrong work".  I felt like I had gone out of my way to support the research group, following the requests of line management - but I learnt a more important lesson about academia.

What I hadn't realised was that academia is a very entrepreneurial environment.  It is not enough to "do as you're told", a work ethic I had inherited.  In academia there is essentially an infinite amount of work coming down stream.  Research is pushing at the frontier, there is always more to do.  And the wider cultural environment is always evolving, forcing education practices to require revising and updating.  The only way to attempt to stay on top of things is to look for new resources and processes.  It's not really possible for one person to dutifully take it all on - we have to adopt a type of continual growth model.  I don't think academia is a place for a hero (as in, solipsistic heroic effort), it's all about community.

It is definitely the case that academia is a very exploitable environment and I have no doubt that (sadly) there are unhealthy occurences.  I can see we also do our best to be proactive and safe-guard against this.  The more positive picture is the growth model.  I came to regard that quite brutal feedback to mean that when work comes our way, the most useful first thought is to ask how this work can itself be used to help grow our factors of production - this means people, resources, tools, capcity, and so on.  For example, it wasn't obvious to me that it is possible to write a bid for money to employ someone - that's a part of the academic game.  Trying to take it all on myself was a very naive mistake.  It wasn't obvious to me that asking for more was possible.

In my opinion, this is the aspect of academia which is most risky and builds a negative reputation.  There is always more work to do, and it can feel like a key skill is to simply delegate the work down the chain (I disagree with this!).  Eventually, there are early career academics or PhD students who may not feel able to say no.  Clearly, this would be unfair and unreasonable.  The healthier approach to "always more work" is to instead promote and create well resourced opportunities.  Each piece of work, if well supported, is an opportunity for growth and progression.  If we can keep growing, then the work can be distributed more fairly and reasonably.  If the work is necessary, then it should be properly resourced.

I realise this is a very idealistic perspective, it may chafe, and if taken to it's extremes it is simply not sustainable.  It is definitely challenging in today's UK economic environment.  However, it is a positive, aspirational view, and it feels like my current experience as an academic.  Of course, work for it's own sake needs clearing away.  But as an academic, my experience continues to be that there is an overwhelming, often bewilding amount of necessary work to do.  I find it is much more comfortable, meaningful and manageable to not be intimidated by this - to instead look at it through a lens of leverage to collectively help everyone to grow and achieve success.

I find that this general concept occurs for me even at my immediate, local and personal experiences as an academic.  A core part of my current experience as an academic is that I have an unparalleled degree of freedom and autonomy, as long as I operate within the institutions policy and regulations.  On a day to day basis, I really do have the freedom to decide what I will work on and how - although, within that climate of too much to do.  Sometimes, this is a source of stress.  But most of the time it is a source of joy and fulfilment for me.  

For example, when I am spending time preparing for teaching, I am really thinking about what I can provide that will maximise potential and opportunity for growth.  As a teacher, I feel much more like an entrepreneurial facilitator.  Teaching doesn't have to be a "heroic burden" of providing one-way instruction to students - it can be a collaborative, community environment.  I enjoy interacting with my students, hearing about their experiences.  For me, this simple reframing makes the work enjoyable because of the prospect of very enriching, positive outcomes on the horizon.  It becomes exciting to do.  So my experience as a teaching-academic, is that I have given the space and freedom to shape the experience of learning, and in the end multiply our efforts (staff and students).

## Closing Thoughts

I realise that so far, I've only written very broadly about "being an academic", and then very specifically about teaching.  I am engaged in many other different activities in my day-to-day.  I am also research-active in robotics, although I feel a little unusual in that I progress my research slowly.  Recently becoming the school education director has felt like an entirely new experience for me of being highly visible in leadership position.  It feels like there is a crazy range of contexts I am working in - so I hope that overtime these will get their representation in the blog posts I publish.



